James 4.6, God opposes the haughty ones, but he gives undeserved kindness to the humble ones.
Well, haughtiness is really disdainful pride, superciliousness, arrogance. One who is
haughty is in his own estimation superior to his fellow men. On the other hand, humility
is freedom from pride or arrogance. It's the state of lowliness of mind. Humility and
haughtiness are the exact opposites of each other. Humility is here. Haughtiness is at the
other end of the spectrum. Which one are you? Likely neither, but somewhere in between.
Now if Jehovah had a humble haughty meter, where would the needle be if he was monitoring
you? Would it be in the middle? Well, hopefully not. Hope would be a closer to humility. We're
imperfect, but we want to be as far away from haughtiness as possible. The verse said,
Jehovah opposes the haughty, but he favors those who are humble. Haughtiness is not totally
a mental condition per se. I'll please find Mark chapter 7 with me. Mark 7 verse 21 and
22, Jesus put haughtiness in a lineup with many unsavory qualities and actions. Well, if
it's not totally a mental condition, what is haughtiness? Notice how Jesus describes where
it comes from. In Mark chapter 7, 21 and 22, it says, for from inside, out of the heart
of men, so it's a heart condition, come injurious reasoning, sexual immorality, thefts, murders,
acts of adultery, greed, acts of wickedness, deceit, brazen conduct, an imbibious eye, blasphemy,
haughtiness and unreasonableness. All these things come from within and defile a man. So haughtiness
is really a condition of the heart, the inner person. And it says, it's a wicked thing. Well,
what about humility? In some ancient cultures, a humble person was always thought to be a slave,
miserable, a pitiful person. But humility is not the same as humiliation.
Instead, in the Bible, it stresses that humility, the slowliness of mine can actually lead to
honor, to status with God. And so does it Proverbs 22, 4 says, the result of humility is riches and
glory and life. Not miserable, not pitiful by any means. But we said earlier that Jehovah had a
humble, haughty meter that the needle likely would not be pegged out on humility in our case,
nor on haughtiness. Well, why is that? Well, because as dedicated Christians, none of us are
absolutely haughty at heart. But as imperfect dedicated Christians, none of us have the market
on true humility. Only Jehovah and Jesus were absolutely humble. Well, can we be basically
a humble person, and yet act haughtily or arrogant at times? Well, let's consider Moses.
Jehovah gave him tremendous authority, and it's known that power, authority, responsible position
can erode humility. But Moses proved his humility time after time. For example, in Numbers chapter 11,
he gathered together 70 elders, and verse 25 says that Jehovah took some of the spirit of Moses
away and put it on the 70 elders, and they began to behave as prophets. Well, there's nothing that
indicates Moses gelously tried to guard his authority and privileges. He was humble.
And we all remember the account where Moses' father-in-law suggested that he delegate some of
his workload to others. Moses did not ericently resist that. He humbly accepted the suggestion.
And then later at the end of his life, when Jehovah chose his replacement Joshua,
Moses humbly accepted that decision. He urged the people to follow Joshua's lead.
Well, we could say nothing else than Moses was an excellent example of humility.
But he was not perfect. Please find with me Numbers chapter 20. Numbers 20, humble Moses allowed
himself to be provoked and perform an act of haughtiness or arrogance. The situation was that there
was no water for the assembly of Israel, and the people began to show arrogant, rebellious spirit.
Please pick up the dialogue with me in verse 4 of Numbers chapter 20. They said,
Why have you brought Jehovah's congregation into this wilderness for us in our livestock to die here?
And why have you let us up out of Egypt to bring us to this evil place? It's no place for seed and
figs and vines and pomegranates, and there's no water to drink. Well, they got under Moses' skin.
They caused him to lose his humility momentarily. Look at verse 9. So Moses took the rod from
before Jehovah just to see it commanded him. Then Moses and Aaron called the congregation together
before the Craig, and he said to them, Here now you rebels must we, meaning Aaron and I, bring out
water for you from this Craig? Well, that was a haughty, arrogant act. Admittedly, the people
were out of line with their speech and attitude, but Jehovah took note of the spike in the needle
of the haughty meter. Look at verse 12. Jehovah later said to Moses and Aaron, because you did not
show faith in me and sanctify me before the eyes of the people of Israel, you will not bring this
congregation into the land that I will give them. So though generally Moses' needle was always
very close to humility, Jehovah was displeased with this spike on the needle toward haughtiness
even though momentary. Well, it's good for us to consider this because it's easy for us to lose
our humility, particularly if we are invested with some authority. Maybe we have a new responsibility
in the congregation on the circuit at the branch, or maybe we have a skill and talent that we
excel in and we get compliments galore, or we're at odds with a fellow believer. Well, we maintain our
humility. There was a great line in the February 2013 watchtower that said, remember, in order to be
useful to Jehovah, our humility should always exceed our ability. King Saul, he allowed his ability
to exceed his humility. In 1 Samuel 1517, he was to not take any spoils from the land, but he allowed
that to happen. And in that verse 17, Samuel confronted him and he said, were you not insignificant or
humble in your own eyes? And then he says, why did you disobey Jehovah? Well, Saul stammered and
stuttered, but bottom line, Jehovah's not pleased because in verse 23, Jehovah said through Samuel
rebelliousness is the same as a synod divination, pushing ahead presumptuously the same as magical
power and adultery. You rejected the word of God, I reject you as King. Well, just as our text
said, Jehovah, opposes the haughty ones, may we all strive to keep our needle close to humility.